# State and Props

<h2>Props</h2>

- the way to pass functions, state, etc to other components

Example of passing props:

```
function Welcome(props) {
    return <h1>Hello, {props.name}</h1>
}

function App() {
    return (
        <div>
            <Welcome name="Sara" />
            <Welcome name="Collie" />
            <Welcome name="Maddy" />
        </div>
    );
}
```
The above example has a Welcome component that has one property "name" passed in as props.

- props are read only, cannot modify props

<h2>State</h2>

- state is what is used to handle values that can change over time
- state should be treated as immutable and never changed directly. Only with the setState method.
- state can be passed in props

Example declaration in a <b>class</b> component:

```
import React, { Component } from 'react';

class App extends Component {
  constructor() {
    super();

    this.state = {
      count: 0,
    };

    this.countUp = this.countUp.bind(this);
  }

  countUp() {
    this.setState({
      count: this.state.count + 1,
    });
  }

  render() {
    return (
      <div>
        <button onClick={this.countUp}>Click Me!</button>
        <p>{this.state.count}</p>
      </div>
    );
  }
}
```
In a <b>class</b> component the state is declared in the constructor of a class component. The setState method is used to modify the state.

With the introduction of hooks, we can use state in function based components! In a function based component, using state looks like the following: 

```
import React from 'react' or import React, {useState} from 'react'

// useState returns an array with the state in the first index and a function to modify the state in the second index
// can also do useState('initial state') depending on above import
const [initialState, setInitialState] = React.useState('initial state'); 
```

In the example above, we can see that useState can be imported as a named import and then be directly used. OR we can just do React.useState and use the state hook that way. The convention of declaring state is to destructure it like above and follow the naming convention of stateVariable and setStateVariable. This makes it easy to read.

Example of using setState as a beginner:

```
const [count, setCounter] = useState(0);

function add() {
  setCount(count + 1);
}
```

Example of using setState with best practice:

```
const [count, setCount] = useState(0);

function add() {
  setCount(prevCount => prevCount + 1);
}

return(
  <div onClick={add}>Add</div>
)

```
In the best practice code, a callback function is put into setCount and the value returned from it is used by setCount to set the state variable. This works because the setCount function automatically fills in the argument of the callback with the previous state.
This is best practice because in the background react does some things to ensure that you get the latest value of the state variable.

If we just want to set the state variable directly to some value we can do that, but in many cases we care about the previous value so the above is the best practice in that scenario.

Example of directly setting:

```
setCount(50);
```

<b>State with arrays</b>:

Say we have the following:
```
const [numArray, setNumArray] = React.useState([1, 2])
```
and we want to add things to this array. An initial thought would be to:
```
setNumArray(prevNumArray => prevNumArray.push(5));
```
This is a bad idea because we are modifying prevNumArray directly by pushing into it. Also the push method returns the length of the new array so it would not be correct.

The right way to do it would be to use the spread syntax.
```
setNumArray(prevNumArray => [...prevNumArray, 5]);
```

<b>State with objects</b>:

Similar to arrays we also use spread:
```
const [personInfo, setPersonInfo] = React.useState({
    firstName: "John",
    lastName: "Doe",
    phone: "+1 (719) 555-1212",
    email: "itsmyrealname@example.com",
    isFavorite: false
})

function changeFavourite() {
  setPersonInfo(prevPersonInfo => {
    return {
      ...prevPersonInfo,
      isFavorite: !prevPersonInfo.isFavorite
    }
  })
}
```
<b>Passing State around</b>

If we imagine the layout of a react project as a component tree, we have App at the top and all of its components as children. If we want components to access state, we need to set state in the appropriate component. State cannot go upwards or sideways (i.e. siblings cannot access each other's state). If we want siblings to access the same state, then we need to put the state in the parent component. 
