# Hooks

General Tips:
- don't call hooks inside loops, conditions, or nested functions
    - always use hooks at the top level of React functions

<h2>useState</h2>

- a component's memory

<br>
<b>Usage:</b>

const [count, setCount] = React.useState(0);

useState returns an array with exactly two items: state variable and a function to set the state variable (setter function). The state variable must be treated as immutable and only changed with the setter function. When the setter function updates the state variable, it will invoke React to trigger a render. This is why not using the setter function will cause bugs as the UI will not update as the setter function is not invoking a render.  Setting state only changes it for the next render. If you want to change the state multiple times in a setter function, use an updater function. e.g. setCount(prevCount => prevCount ...do stuff)

Refer to notes in 2. State and Props for updating arrays/objects in state.

<b>Tips for structuring state</b>

1. Group related state - if you update two or more state variables at the state time, consider merging them into one variable
2. Avoid contradictions
3. Avoid redundant state - if you can calculate some information from the component's props or its existing state variables, don't put that information into state
4. Avoid duplication
5. Avoid deeply nested state - aim for state to have a flat structure


<h2>useEffect</h2>

- used to step outside of React, like make a network connection or use a DOM API

<b>Usage:</b>

useEffect(() => {
    // effect code here
}, [])


useEffect takes two arguments, a function and a dependencies array. The function defines what should be done in the Effect and the dependencies array specifies when the Effect should be run. By default, the effect will run after every render, but by specifying a dependency array, the Effect will run only when variables within it change. The effect is guaranteed to run at least once, when the component "mounts", i.e. when it appears on the screen for the first time. The dependencies are determined by the code in the Effect.

By returning a function from the effect, we can clean up Effects. For example, disconnecting from a service after the user has navigated away from the page. If the disconnection doesn't happen, the user could navigate to the page again and there would be TWO connections to the service instead of one. This can eventually lead to performance issues (memory leak and so on). Most likely, if an Effect doesn't work as expected or breaks, a cleanup function needs to be implemented.

<b>Tips for useEffect</b>

- Typical places to clean up
    - fetching data
        - implement a useEffect with an ignore variable that is changed to true in the cleanup
    - things that fire more than once (in development) is an indicator that clean up is needed
    
<h2>useRef</h2>

- allows you to keep a mutable value within a component, without triggering re-renders
- "memory" without re-renders, unlike useState
- can be used to directly access DOM nodes
- good to use instead of document.querySelector since querySelector has a worst case of O(n) since it may need to scan every element in the document. ref will be O(1)

<br>
<b>Usage:</b>

const ref = useRef(initialValue);

useRef returns an object with one attribute, current:

```
{
    current: initialValue
}
```

React also has a built in way to assign a ref to a DOM element via the ref property:

```
function SomeInput(){
    const inputRef = useRef(null);

    return <input ref={inputRef}>
}
```
This will create a reference to the DOM node by assigning inputRef.current to the specified node. On the first render, the value will be null, but in following renders, the current property will have the reference to the specified DOM node.

React sets ref.current during the commit.

<b>Tips for using useRef</b>
- don't read or write to it during rendering
- usually refs will be accessed from event handlers, if you need to do something with a ref, but have no event to do it in (like a onClick), then may need an effect (useEffect)
    - this is because useRef will be set to null initially


Sources:
- react beta docs: https://beta.reactjs.org/
