# Brief Intro on Asynchronous JS

Since JS is the language of the web, there will be times where functions will take a long time to complete. This is when you would want to use asynchronous code - code that can run in the background - so that other things can happen while the long running code clicks away in the background.

<h2>Callbacks</h2>

The most common way asynchronous code was handled was with callbacks.

A callback is a function passed into another function as an argument, which is invoked by the outer function to complete some kind of action.

For example:

```
body.addEventListner("click", function() {
    // code
});
```

addEventListener takes a callback and calls it when the body is clicked.

Callbacks are going out of style as maintaining and writing code with callbacks can get very confusing. e.g. Callback hell

Other problems with callbacks are:
- trust issues
    - callback called too early
    - callabck called too late (or never)
    - callback called too few or too many times
    - callback doesn't pass the right parameters/environment
    - callback swallows errors/exceptions
- inversion of control
    - callbacks give control over to another party to invoke the continuation of your program

<h2>Promises</h2>

Promises are the new, popular way to handle asynchronous code. Many libraries/frameworks use promises to complete asynchronous functions. For example, Fetch API. Promises can be created from scratch using its constructor, but this should only be needed to wrap old APIs. Ideally, we work with things that return promises, like the Fetch API.

Some references:
- https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Guide/Using_promises
- https://github.com/getify/You-Dont-Know-JS/blob/1st-ed/async%20%26%20performance/ch3.md

A promise is an object representing the eventual completion/failure of an asynchronous function. Instead of passing callbacks, you attach callbacks to the promise, for future execution (i.e when promise is successful/failed).

Use the then() function to attach a callback to the promise (i.e. another asynchronouse operation). This is called a promise chain. then() returns a new promise, different from the original. then() takes two optional arguments then(successCallback, failurecallback). catch() is used to catch errors/exceptions but is actually synatactic sugar for then(null, failureCallback). Always return results or catch.

```
doSomething()
.then(result => doSomethingElse(result))
.then(newResult => doThirdThing(newResult))
.then(finalResult => {
  console.log(`Got the final result: ${finalResult}`);
})
.catch(failureCallback);
```

Promise.resolve() and Promise.reject() are shortcuts to manually create an already resolved/rejected promise.
Promise.all() and Promise.race() can run asynchronous operations in parallel and have some useful contexts.
