# Promises

<h2>On inversion of control, and how promises deal with it</h2>

In the callback paradigm, asynchronous code is invoked by some task, say ```foo(callback)```, but with promises, we wait for a completion of an event (fullfillment of a promise) then we proceed with another task (.then()). This way of waiting for a completion of an event instead of having functions invoked for us is where promises restore control and solve the inversion of control issue.

<h2>Thenables - Identifying if something is a genuine Promise</h2>

An important detail is identifying if a value is a genuine Promise or will behave like a Promise.
It was decided that an object is a Promise if it has a then() method. Of course, any object can simply implement a then() method and this would pass the thenable type check. It is important to keep note of this.

<h2>Promise Trust</h2>

<h3>Calling too early</h3>


- promises by definition cannot be susceptible to this concern because then() will always be called asynchronously

<h3>Calling too late</h3>

- similar to calling too early, then() will fire the callback in a predictable manner

<h3>Calling too few or too many times</h3>

- promises are defined so that they resolve once (resolve(..) and reject(..) can only be called once, so the then() callback will only be called once
- however, the same callback can be called multiple times so it is possible to create bad code this way

<h3> Trustable Promise </h3>

The ES6 Promise implementation comes with a way to ensure that something is a legitimate Promise with Promise.resolve(..). If you pass an immediate, non-Promise, non-thenable value to Promise.resolve, you get a promise fulfilled with that value. More importantly, if you pass a non-Promise thenable value to Promise.resolve(), it will attempt to unwrap that value until a concrete non-Promise value is extracted and returned as a Promise.

<h3>Chain Flow </h3>

- can string multiple Promises together to create a sequence of async steps (with .then())
    - this works because:
        1. then(..) creates and returns a new promise, which we can chain with
        2. the value returned from then is automatically set as the fulfillment of the chained Promise

Example (taken from You-don't-know-JS):
```
var p = Promise.resolve( 21 );

var p2 = p.then( function(v){
	console.log( v );	// 21

	// fulfill `p2` with value `42`
	return v * 2;
} );

// chain off `p2`
p2.then( function(v){
	console.log( v );	// 42
} );
```
The above example can be simplified by removing the p2 and just using .then.

<h3>Terminology: Resolve, Fulfill and Reject. Naming the callbacks</h3>

Consider the Promise(..) constructor:

```
var p = new Promise( function(X,Y){
	// X() for fulfillment
	// Y() for rejection
} );
```

Promise will have two callbacks, X and Y. What is a good way to name them? X is usually used to mark the Promise as fulfilled, while Y always marks the Promise as rejected. X should be named resolved and Y should be named rejected. 

What about the callbacks to then()? They should be fulfilled and rejected.

<h3>Error Handling</h3>

try..catch is synchronous only so it doesn't help in async code contexts. 

Use .catch to end the promise chain. The catch at the end will pick up any error that happens in the .then()s.

```
fetch('https://typo-d-website.com')
.then(response => response.json())
.catch(err => console.log(err))
```

